Hi, this is Scott. I
really appreciate our sponsors because
they make the show possible.
Today's show is sponsored by
Tellerik create compelling app experiences
across any screen with the
Tellerik platform Telerx end to
end platform. Uniquely combines industry
leading UI tools with cloud
services to simplify the entire
app development cycle Tellerik offers
everything.net developers need to build
quality apps faster. Try it
free at tellerik.com/platform that's tellerik.com/platform
from hanselminutes.com. It's Hanselman. That's
a weekly discussion with web
developer and technologist Scott Hanselman.
This is Lawrence. Ryan are
announcing show number four 35.
In this episode, Scott talks
with Cal Amit about his
dog net based no SQL
solution called Brightstar DB. Hi,
this is Scott Hanselman. This
is another episode of Hansel
minutes, and I'm talking with
Cal Ahmed from the Brightstar
DB project. Hey, how are
you, sir? I'm fine. How
are you doing brilliant. Brilliant.
Thank you for chatting with
me today. So Brightstar db@brightstardb.com
is a embeddable scalable, no
SQL database. And it's for
the.net platform. No SQL has
been a hot term for
a couple of years. Now.
It's embedded in the term.
No SQL is, is almost
an impugning of SQL as
a concept. Like what is
this the exact opposite of
a SQL database? No, not
really. Not, not, I don't
think the exact exact opposite.
We still try to adhere
to the basic tenants of,
of acid compliance. So we
still look to make sure
that we have atomic and
cost systems and durable transactions.
So we still actually have
the data storage guarantees of,
of a SQL database. What
we've really kind of wanted
to give away is the,
the necessity to define your
schema upfront. Ah, okay. So,
so when someone says no
sequel, they're really saying no
schema. No, I was going
to say like that kind
of oppressiveness of SQL database,
like the schema there's value
in that it's almost like
strong typing versus dynamic typing
in languages. Isn't it For
us? Yes. But I think
you'll find that as you
look across the no SQL
space that no SQL means
different things to different folk.
So you will find that
there are no SQL databases
that do require some sort
of a predefined schema, but
they may give up on
some of the asset compliance
constraints in order to provide
you with better performance or
better scalability. Oh, okay. So
if no means different things
to different people, it isn't
really fair for someone to
say I'm in the market
for a no SQL database.
Cause that almost doesn't say
enough. Exactly. Yes. I mean,
when you're looking around at
the no SQL space, what
you really should be comparing
the different offerings on is
how do they meet my
particular applications requirements? And I
think this is another key
thing is that you can't
really think of, I know
sequel now I'm going to
go out and learn no
SQL and I'm going to
be able to apply it
to all of my projects
equally because the different offerings
out there will give you
different benefits and different constraints
for the different kinds of
projects you work on. So
maybe you're looking for pushing
through high volumes of transactions
of right transactions. You will
go down one choice. Maybe
you're looking for really fast
query speeds and being able
to custom define your index
strategies, then you're going to
maybe go down a different
route. So, you know, there's
really is a huge amount
of choice. And I think
that's also one of the,
the things that you find
in the no SQL community
is that people are building
now data storage solutions that
fit a particular profile of
application. Ah, interesting. So if
we think about CQL from
the Microsoft person's perspective, there's,
you know, there's SQL server
and all flavors and all
kinds of applications are created
on top of that, but
there is still just, you
know, SQL server. And now
you can certainly design a
system that has one table
and does everything on one
giant table and, or you
could have a big enterprise
ones when we, I think
we've all been inflicted by
SQL server databases that have
hundreds or thousands of tiny
tables, but ultimately it's still
SQL server. It has the
behavior characteristics of SQL server.
You're saying that I might
do three or four different
projects and decide on a
no SQL database, but might
find that one, no SQL
database is great for the
profile and the, the behavior
characteristics required of like a
shopping cart while another one
might be appropriate for a
cache or another one might
be appropriate for a product
database. Exactly. Yeah. Interesting. So
I can, I have a
lot more flexibility in the
no sequel worlds just because
there's so many more specialized
databases available to me. That's
right. I mean, so it,
it can be a little
bit of a headache because
you really need to educate
yourself about all of the
different options that are out
there, or you may find
it difficult to sort of
zoom in on the particular
product. That's going to meet
your application profile comps. You've
got to think ahead a
step where, you know, perhaps
in the more traditional approach,
you'll say, okay, well we've
got sequel now what's the
problem. Hmm. Okay. So if
I am, and I'm thinking
to myself that the solution
to a problem that I
have is a no SQL
database. Like Brightstar DB, what
else do I need to
be thinking about other than
the term, no SQL like
what problems space would lead
me to do your database?
So I think there, again,
across the, across the space,
there are probably different hotspots
or different problem areas that
you're looking at in your
particular application that might draw
you one way or another
in terms of which no
SQL database you go for
our main selling point, if
you like is, is flexibility.
It's the ability to essentially
have a, a scheme of
free environment. One way you
can simply add a data
of, of pretty much any
shape. And I think that
the other key advantage key
benefit that we have is
that underneath it all, we've
actually built on top of
W3C RDF, beta model standard.
So you're actually storing your
data as an RDF graph.
We actually implement some of
the IDF interchange standards and
the query standards. So if
you're kind of familiar with
that world, or if you
want to learn about that
world, and you're a.net developer,
I think Brightstar DB is
a great way into the
whole RDF semantic web sort
of area. Hmm. Okay. So
RDF is resource description framework.
And if I remember correctly,
it's been around for quite
a long, long time, but
it got the, the one,
one specification was published just
this year. That's right. Yes.
So it's been around since
right at the end of
the nineties, I think 99
is when the, the one
O spec came out and
it's kind of been there
and been bubbling under and,
and, you know, people have
been using it in, in
the search applications and so
on for, for a while.
But I think over the
past sort of maybe one
or two years as the
whole move towards publishing data
online has really grown in
popularity. RDF provides that, you
know, W3C defined a standard
for interchange of data, of
all kinds of shapes. So
it really does fulfill a
particular need in the, in
the data publishing area. But
it does it with such
general model that you can
actually apply it to much
smaller problem spaces and get
some of the benefits of
having that very flexible database.
Why did it see such
a resurgence? I mean, when
I see examples of RDF
descriptions of like people, it
reminds me of, of XML
type thinking with like namespaces,
and they'll say w3c.org/ 2000,
you know, this is a
15, 20 year old thing,
but it suddenly got this
resurgence just in the last
year because people are excited
about rest and, and the
semantic web People are excited
about maybe they won't say
semantic web semantic web is,
has kind of got a
lot of baggage with it
from, from many years past.
But people are excited about
publishing data in, in a
way where they can interchange
data and where they can
link data sets together. So
for example, you might be
aware of DBP DEO, which
is the project that essentially
scrapes all of the info
box information from, from the
Wikipedia site and formats, it
uppers as huge RDF data
set that is publicly available,
that you can use very
simple restful API calls to
go and grab information about
any subject that is, has
got a Wikipedia page. And
that data comes back to
you in RDF format. So
when people create applications, I
was like, I've seen a
number of windows, eight applications
that are front ends on
top of Wikipedia. They're very
likely scraping that from Wikipedia
itself, which lends itself to
be scraped just because of
the regularity of the, of
the display. But you're saying
DB pedia is an RDF
representation of what's inside of
Wikipedia. That would be the
more appropriate thing for me
to pull from. Exactly. Yes.
And, and then, and because
they are then using these
minted persistent identifiers for the
things that they talk about,
it means that you can
then publish your own data
set that has some additional
information maybe about these subjects.
And you can hook essentially
merge your data with DBP
DIA data and get a
consistent view across all of
that information. So this kind
of information integration and building
a web of data where
everything is loosely linked in
the same way that we're
pages are loosely linked. You
know, one data set may
refer to another data, set.
These things don't have to
ever know about each other.
So it, it is just
a very loose loosely coupled
graph of data. That's spread
out all across the web.
When we see examples of
these data sets and RDF
datasets, they always seem to
have classes like country or
album, director, you know, things,
but there's usually like a
top 10 or top 20
things, game book, movie politician,
but that's not something that's
specific to RDF, right? Those
are just example things. Exactly.
Yeah. So RDF doesn't predefine
any of these, these sort
of types at all. So
it is totally free to
the application developers or the
data developers to define their
own classes and to define
how they're those classes may
be equivalent or different to
other classes that other people
have defined. So the, there
is a huge amount of
freedom essentially to say whatever
you want to say in
the way that you want
to say it just as
a HTML, it gives us
exactly that freedom with the
text and the images that
we want to convey humans.
RDF gives us that freedom
with the data that we
want to convey to machines,
to applications. Okay. So RDF,
isn't a, a serialization format
as it is an example
of an expression of what
a graph of data can
look like in memory. And
then there are different serialization
formats that one could take
their RDF and express it
as Absolutely. Yes. Yeah. So
it's, it is a, a
data model really. So it,
it finds a graph like
data model. And then on
top of the RDF base,
a whole bunch of other,
there's a whole stack of,
of standards that go up
and give you things like
being able to find how
your types exist in your,
in your data and how
they're related to types of
properties. You know, how they're
related the queer, there's a
query language, then there's all
kinds of interchange syntaxes as
well. Okay. So important for
myself and the listeners to
remember or think about that
a data model and the
description of a data model
doesn't necessarily describe what those
bites look like on disc.
And that's kind of an
obvious thing to say in
retrospect, but also maybe not
obvious when someone is used
to answering questions by simply
opening something up in notepad
and saying, Oh, look, there's
the RDF. You can't really
do that. Right? Yeah, absolutely.
So then what is, what
are things like? I hear
N triples and I hear
turtle, what are these terms?
So these are different syntaxes
for representing RDF data. So,
and triples is a very
simple, easy to pause line
oriented format. The RDF at
the core of the RDF
data model is this idea
of a triple, which is
simply a statement of subject
predicate object. So it's the
thing you want to talk
about the property that you
want to assign a value
for, and then the value
for that property. And that,
that thing is that triple
is serialized, you know, one
per line in an enterprise
format. It's really easy to
read. It's released to pause,
it's released to generate. And,
and then turtle it is
takes essentially takes the, the
basics of entry, pulls that,
and then actually adds a
bunch of features that makes
it a lot more compact
and easier to write as
a, as a human being.
It's easier to, you know,
when you're communicating with somebody
about some problem that you've
got with your IDF data,
you can hack up an
example in turtle to show
them, Hey, look, this is
what, you know, what I
want it to look like,
or this is, this is
the result that I'm getting.
And it's easier, easier for
humans to grok and it's
a bit more compact than
and triples. Okay. Okay. So
then Brightstar DB is an
implementation of the W3C CS
data model, which is RDF.
And then your system says
that it is a, has
a triple store, right? Yep.
So how do you represent
your data like on disc
and how do you think
about your data? So we
think about our data as,
as a collection of, of
if you like two levels
of partition. So the, the
high level partition is, is
a store and that's like
a physical partition. So that's
a, an individual director that
consent contains some data files
that contain all of our
indexes. And so on. Then
within a store, you have
a collection of RDF graphs.
And so each graph is,
is like a set of
triples and it's a bounded
named set of triples. And
when you go into query,
you can either query one
particular graph or some combination
of graphs or all the
graphs together. So that's our
basic, you know, that's our
kind of, if you like
logical partitioning of the data,
and then when we get
down to actually on, on
desk, what we're scoring is
the basic indexing into those
sets of triples. So we're
storing B tree indexes that
get you down through the,
through the triple structure to
help you fight. You have
to find the particular object
for a given subject and
predicate or vice versa. And
then obviously to map those
to the map, the identifiers
that we have to the
actual values, You said, bounded
name, what does that mean?
So as you already mentioned,
everything in RDF uses URS.
So it uses the, the
uniform resource identifier schemes for,
for identifying the thing that
you want to talk about.
So a subject always has
a URI and the predicate
is always defined by URI.
And then the value can
either be another URI, or
it can be a, a
string or an integer or
something like that. But the
graph is essentially another thing
that also has a URI.
And it's just a context
for all of the statements.
So for example, if I'm
collecting information, let's say about
movies, I might have one
graph that has all of
the movies that are released
in 2014, and then another
graph that is all the
movies that released in 2013
and maybe create a graph
per year as a logical
partition. And that enables me
to, you know, very quickly
just give you current movies
or very quickly give you
a set of movies over
a particular range just by
selecting which graphs I want
to, I want to query
against It's. So for forgive
my ignorance, I'm going to
try to draw a parallel
here and you can tell
me if it's a, if
it's a dumb question in
a, in a, in a
previous life. When I worked
on my blog system called
DAS blog with Clemens masters
and a team, this is
around 2002. It stores all
of the blog entries in
an XML files. And so
it is a, it is
a poor man's database. There's
no backend database there's simply
each day that someone blogged
has a file. So if
I blog on July 3rd, then
there's a July 3rd, 2014 file. And
if I blog 10 times
in on July 3rd, then there's
10 items in that one
file. So the maximum number
of XML files that I
can end up with in
a year is 365. This
means that DAS blog is
even now 10 later, ridiculously
fast when someone is accessing
the data on a daily
basis by, you know, giving
me all the blog posts
for a day and why
it stands up from a
scalability perspective against pretty much
any blogging system out there.
But if I wanted to
ask Josh blog a, a
question that goes across the,
my, my data partitioning, for
lack of a better phrase,
like show me all of
the blog posts in this
category. It falls over quite
quickly, because you can imagine
I'm running through thousands and
thousands of XML files trying
to ask a question that
the data just isn't laid
out on disc correctly. Does
that make sense? Yes. Yeah.
Yeah. And, and, and I
think there's, you know, the,
it's a similar kind of
trade off when you're defining
graphs in RDF. You, you
have that, that sort of,
of tradeoff of wanting to
have partitions that are, you
know, small and, and maybe
more responsive, but at the
same time that you don't,
you don't want to get
to the point of having
so many that when you
need to do something across
all of them, you have
a headache. So, and, and
of course, you know, one
of the, one of the
nice things about having a
very flexible data model where
we have all of these
separate contexts is that there
is absolutely no reason why
you can't say, Oh, Hey,
why don't I just create
another graph that is the
monthly roll up. And it
just has an abstract of
what's in all of these
other daily graphs and from
the monthly ones, one on
our generator, an annual roll
up as well. That has
just some, some subset of
the, of the monthly roll-ups.
So there's, yeah, there's all
kinds of clever ways in
which you can, you can
structure the graphs and graphs
can be, you know, connects
to other graphs as well.
And you can, can build
some, some pretty, pretty cool
kind of data partitioning strategies
using just using graphs and
the metadata for graph. So
does that mean that there
are things that I could
potentially ask the system that
it would not be readily
able to answer or does
it just mean it would
be slightly slower if the
shape of the data isn't
in a, in a way
that is queryable in a,
in a, in a, in
a way that I was
maybe stretching to ask it
questions like this? No, I,
I not, well, as with
all data systems, there are
things which questions are these
good at answering and questions
that it we'll have to
think about. And, and, you
know, we're, we're still kind
of early on in the
development of Brightstar and we
know there are other kinds
of queries that we definitely
need to optimize, but, but
I think with, with Brightstar,
I mean, one of the
things is when I'm talking
about all of these graphs,
that they're really, there are
logical partitioning. So they're breaking
down the data into smaller,
smaller chunks, but at a,
at a physical data storage
level. In fact, they're all
going into the same set
of indexes. So we're actually
able to query across the,
these, these graphs, or if
you like in parallel, just
using the same set of
data files. So it's at
the physical partition level where
you decide that I maybe
want to split my data
across multiple stores that you
then that you will then
hit these problems of, well,
actually, I can't write a
query at the moment that
goes across all the stores
though. That is actually one
of the things that we
would like to address. And
if my data, if my
app, the size of my
data is greater than the
memory that I have a
Brightstar, I'll just we'll do
the right thing and, and
act appropriately, and it'll keep
it, I assume it has
some in-memory indexes. And then
when it can't find something
easily, it needs to go
and chew for a little
while. Exactly. Yeah. I mean,
we're, we, we just implement
persistent bee trees. So we
will have, you know, the
cash Petri pages that we,
that we manage. We use
that B to B tree
structure as well at the
moment, the way we've got
it is we're just actually
using that beach restructure as
the way that we handle
the queries as well. So
yeah, it will absolutely do
that, do the right thing.
We want it to work
on constrained memory devices. So
we want it to work
on your tablet and we
want it to work on
your phone. So that, that's
one of the things also
that we're trying to address
that, you know, maybe it's
a little bit makes it
a little bit different from
some of the other, no
SQL solutions. So you will
run on a windows phone,
even windows phone seven. So
you're talking about servers or
clients or mobile phones. So
if I like, for example,
I'm working on an application
right now that I want
to run on a windows
phone and I want it
to run in windows eight
with a touch screen, but
I might also have a
desktop application I could potentially
use Brightstar DB in all
of those situations. Right. That's
yeah, that's correct. So, you
know, we we've, we've talked
to windows phone seven, we've
talked to PCL builds that
enabled us to run on
windows eight and a windows
phone eight and 8.1. We're
also have the Xamarin flavor
of those PCLs. So you
can app, so Android and
iOS, both on the roadmap
there, they're not particularly tested
yet, and we'd welcome people
to come along and try
it out and, and let
us know how, how they
get on with, with Android,
but the nice people at,
and gave me a, a
development license for, for working
on this stuff. And I'm
really keen now to, to
make sure that we can
run on those platforms as
well. That's cool. One of
the things that is impressive
or surprised, I wouldn't say
impressive, I'd say surprising and
impressive was that I was
checking out all of the
features and looking at, at
this project, and you actually
have an entity framework model
over this. So how do
you deal with the fact
that you've got very, very
typed, very S wishes that
it was CQL model in
the context of affinity framework
and a schema free no
SQL framework underneath it, Right?
Yeah. So the way that
we do that is essentially
we consider your domain model.
So your, your strongly typed
model as simply being a
view onto the data. So
when you set up your
domain model and in bright
star, you do it as
a, as an interface first,
a contract, first, a definition,
and then we do some
cogeneration to build your context.
So when you define your,
your domain model, you've mapped
that domain model to types
and properties in your data
model, and it's all done
by convention. So if you
don't want to, you can
just write an interface, decorate
it with the entity attribute,
and that's all you need
to do, and Brightstar will
take care of the rest.
But if you actually want
to map it to a
particular audio scheme, and maybe
you want to use some
standard schema, that is somebody
else's predefined, then, then you
can go ahead and do
that too. And essentially what
we're doing there is a,
when you create an instance
of the entity, we will
basically, and set properties on
it. We'll set some triples
in the background to go
into a transaction. And when
you save changes, we send
the transaction with inserts and
the deletes that you've made
by changing properties on the,
on the object. The other
nice thing that we can
do when we've done that
is that we implement a,
a link provider as well.
And the link provided we'll
take your link query across
your domain model, actually converted
into a sparkle query because
Brightstar implements the W3C sparkle
standard, which is a standard
query language for IDF. So
we convert the LINQ query
into a spark query and
execute that sparkle query, and
then data bind the results
back into your, into your
domain model. But the really
nice thing about doing it
in this way is, as
I say, your domain model
is actually just a view.
So it's not really kind
of hard coded into the,
it's not tied to the
actual shape of the data
that you've got in the
data store. It's just a
partial view of that data.
And you can have multiple
applications that are all sharing
the same data, but actually
have different views on the
way in which they use
their data the way in
which they extract the data
from the database. If I
want to understand more about
this strongly type versus not
trolling type, if I have
a person and that person
has first name and last
name and birthday, and then
like height, and I know
that's a very trivial thing,
and I could imagine then
how you project a strongly
typed entity framework thing over
to that, but then how
would I change this schema
in the scheme of free
world? Like, let's say these
people no longer have height,
so, but, but they do
because some of them are
already in the database with
height. Yeah. So, so your,
your application no longer wants
to know about height. You
simply delete that, that property
from your applications interfaces, and
then when your application sends
updates, because we're because when
we're dealing with updates, we're
actually not sending an entire
state. We're just sending the
triples for the properties you've
changed. So when you send
the update, you won't be
changing the height and another
application that still does care
about height. We'll still be
able to use that property
set that property updated in
whatever way it wants. So
you have that, you know,
real flexibility that the data
and your model are very
loose. I see. So in
the, in the SQL world,
we would just delete that
column. And then people who
expected it would have their
expectations not met, or people
who tried to update it
would find that that doesn't
exist, that didn't exist. So
that that interface is broken
at the database level. The
way that I would kind
of implement that in a
SQL world would be say
that it was okay to
have a nullable date time.
And then just don't tell
anyone that we're not going
to use it anymore and
don't choose to express it
to them. Right. Exactly. And
in essence, because we're doing
this very loose coupling, you
have to kind of, your,
your application does have to
be aware that you may
define properties for which there
is currently no value. And
you'll just get the default,
unless you define that property
as being nullable, in which
case you will get no.
So you, when you, you
know, there is, there is
some application impact th that
it will have, but it's,
we think it's, it's, it's
a small price to pay
for the additional flexibility. We,
one of the things that
I'm really keen on is
this idea of applications migrating
that data over time, as
you go from version one
of an application to version
two of an application, you
get different data requirements and
you always have this problem.
I've, I've had it in
the past when working with
applications based on sequel is
that, you know, version 1.1
introduces a new column version
1.2 changes, some indexing or
changes the type of another
column. And so you have
all of these migration scripts
that you have to make
sure that you run the
right migration scripts in the
right order to migrate a
customer from version one, to
version two via all of
the intermediate versions that we've
done. All, you have to
create some monster roll up
of all of the data
migration. So you always have
this data migration headache alongside
the application, update headache, and,
and essentially with, with a
store light, bright star that
goes away because the data
model has no schema that
you need to worry about
migrating. The data is just
there. And you just like
your application to, to deal
with the changes that you
know are going to happen.
So you can kind of
take out that whole data
migration, a headache, or, or
at least you can move
it into, into parts of
the code where you just
need to react to, Hey,
maybe they don't have a
high property because they've just
upgraded. And that property hasn't
been set yet. Can you
see how people would, would
look at this who have
been in the industry and
the standard kind of, you
know, SQL database industry for
a while, and been working
in large enterprises that might
say that this all seems
just too magical and too
dangerous and couldn't possibly work
at scale. Yes. I have
conversations with those people. Yes.
Wow. How do you work
best that? Well, I think,
you know, there are a
set of applications for which
this kind of magic is
totally not applicable. And, and
it may be that they're,
they've got things in mind,
which that this data, this
data store is not for
them. But on the other
hand, actually, I would say
that rather than being not
scalable, the whole thing about
having a flexible, open approach
to the way in which
you're storing and managing your
data ultimately makes it more
scalable because it can adapt
to changing environments and to
changing requirements much more rapidly
than a fixed schema that
needs a careful migration plan
and a careful data migration
plan. So, you know, when,
when your application wants to,
for example, if your application
is all just a stovepipe
application, you know, it's my
data, it's my data access
layer. It's my presentation layer.
And that's it. And that's
the whole world that I'm
ever going to have then
SQL may well be exactly
the right way to go.
But if you want an
application that is maybe can
respond to external data sources,
so can merging data from
other sources where you maybe
have less control over how
those data sources changed the
way in which they represented
their data over time, or
where you just want to
be able to start with
a core set of functionality
and then add some new
functionality later on that you
have absolutely no idea right
now, what that is going
to look like, or how
it's going to merge into
your data model. You don't
have a five year plan
for your data migration, then
having the flexibility of, of,
of bright star DB and
the RDF graph based data
model could really work for
you. And it could help
you get over some of
those data hurdles that you're
going to face. This, this
is pretty amazing. And this
is all open source and
people can download it right
now. There's no licensing issues
or anything. That's right. Yeah.
So we chosen the MIT
license. So it's a, it's
totally open people can, can
use it for commercial non-commercial
applications or like, Fantastic. This
is really cool stuff. People
can check this out@brightstardb.com. It's
on new, get, I assume
it's up on a, on
a code Plex or a
get hub. Where do you,
where do you, where do
you host? So we host
that source on get hub.
We host our community discussion
on code flex and the
binary releases are up on
code Plex as well. So
all the links are there
from the website. Very cool.
Very cool. Thanks for chatting
with me today. No, thank
you. This has been another
episode of Hansel minutes and
we'll see you again next
week. .